# Modeling Neural Recording
Validation of these methods was published in Peña, E., Pelot, N.A., Grill, W.M., 2024. Computational models of compound nerve action potentials: Efficient filter-based methods to quantify effects of tissue conductivities, conduction distance, and nerve fiber parameters. PLoS Comput Biol 20, e1011833. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011833

This feature is the first introduction of multiple cuffs within the ASCENT pipeline. Begin setting up a run as usual with ASCENT (refer to [Getting Started](Getting_Started.md) for guidance and a tutorial). To use our pipeline to model neural recording, two major elements need to be present within the JSON configuration files. To prompt the pipeline to model neural recording of single fiber action potentials (SFAPs), the user should first provide a list of two JSON Objects to the `cuff` property within the **_Model_** configuration file. Each JSON Object within this list should have all the original required cuff properties outlined in [Model](JSON/JSON_parameters/model.md) including the `"index"` property which assigns the cuff an index identifier that can be referenced to set contact weights and cuff type (stimulation or recording) in **_Sim_**. The second major element is defining the electrode contact weights in the **_Sim_** file. As with a original single cuff ASCENT run through, the `active_srcs` property in this file contains key-value pairs of contact weights for each preset cuff (as described in [Sim File](JSON/JSON_parameters/sim.md)). Now, for modeling recording, the user should add an additional `active_recs` property that serves the same purpose for the recording cuff. For these two properties, the user must add an additional key-value pair called `cuff_index`, which ASCENT uses to match the weighting properties to the cuff indices we defined in the **_Model_** file. Any index defined in `"active_srcs"` designates a stimulating cuff. Any index defined in `"active_recs"` designates a recording cuff. Remember to include any cuff preset names the relevant stimulation and recording cuffs in `config/system/cuffs`. Run the pipeline as usual from the root directory with `python run pipeline <insert run index>`. Following the completion of the run, change directories to `/submit` and run `python submit.py <insert run index>` to submit the NEURON simulations. Following the completion of the NEURON simulations, navigate to the root ascent directory and run `python run import_n_sims <insert run index>` to transfer NEURON results from the `submit` directory to the `sample` directory, where the data can be accessed by the scripts in `examples/analysis`.

Similar to the tutorial (See [Getting Started](Getting_Started.md)), we provide example configuration files for modeling stimulation and recording of a rat vagus nerve. The files can be found in `examples/cap_tutorial`.


## NEURON Outputs

When running a model with a recording cuff, in addition to the standard stimulation cuff output files, running NEURON simulations using submit.py will produce an output .dat file for every n_sim generated, called `SFAP_time`, containing the recorded SFAP collected by the recording cuff. Each SFAP file has a column for the stimulation waveform's time points (ms) and a column for corresponding recorded SFAP (uV).

Optionally, the user can set the `saving > cap_recording > Imembrane_matrix` boolean variable in the **_Simulation_** file to `true` to save a transmembrane current matrix for each fiber which contains all the transmembrane currents of every compartment across time. Be careful, as these files can be quite large if there are many fiber simulations.


## Current Limitations

- The multiple cuff configuration framework is designed to support any number of cuffs, but has only been tested using two cuffs, with one designated as the stimulation cuff and the other designated as the recording cuff.

## Analysis Scripts

### Plotting Single Fiber Action Potentials (SFAPs)

The `examples/analysis/plot_SFAPs.py` script allows users to visualize the recorded single fiber action potentials (SFAPs) that resulted from modeling the neural recordings. The user should open the script and update the `sample`, `model`, and `sim` number accordingly in the call to query, as in the other analysis scripts. The user may plot the SFAPs from all the fibers simulated (default behavior), controlled by the `all_fibers` input boolean argument to the call to the query class' `sfap_data` function. Alternatively, the user may choose to indicate a subset of fiber indices to plot using the `fiber_indices` variable at the top of the script. If both variables are provided, and `all_fibers` is True, the `fiber_indices` are ignored and all fibers will be provided. Run the script from the ascent root directory with the command `python examples/analysis/plot_SFAPs.py`.

### Plotting Compound Action Potentials (CAPs)
The `examples/analysis/plot_CNAP.py` script allows users to visualize the combined action potentials of multiple fibers. The user should open the script and update the `sample`, `model`, and `sim` number accordingly in the call to query, as in the other analysis scripts. As described above, the user may plot the combined SFAPs from all simulated fibers (default behavior), or may choose to only visualize a subset of fibers by indicating their indices in the `fiber_indices` variable. Run the script from the ascent root directory with the command `python examples/analysis/plot_CNAP.py`.

### Generating Current Templates per Fiber Diameter

In `examples/analysis`, a script is provided called `generate_templates.py` which allows users to generate transmembrane current action potential _templates_ for each fiber diameter in a given simulation. These templates require the transmembrane current matrices to be saved, as described above. The templates can be used in conjunction with the following MATLAB repository (https://github.com/eurypt/CAPulator) to simulate whole-nerve fiber populations efficiently with a a speed up of 27,000 - 1,900,000x in terms of CPU hours {cite:p}`Pena2024`. Rather than simulating every action potential of every nerve fber, the template method uses the action potential from a _single point in space_ and a few _discrete nerve fiber diameters_ to interpolate the action potential at _every point in space_ across _all fiber diameters_ present in the nerve. See the publication for more details.

To generate the templates, open the script and update the `sample`, `model`, `sim`, and `fiber` values at the top of the file accordingly. The `fiber` variable refers to the fiber number within each generated n_sim. Then, run the script from the ascent root directory with the command `python examples/analysis/generate_templates.py`. The action potential templates are expected to differ in latency depending on the stimulation model parameters, and the templates differ across fiber types. Thus, the user should run the script for each distinct set of stimulation parameters or fiber types.
